Release notes for 24.3 (#565)
stackabletech/documentation: modules/ROOT/pages/release-notes.adoc

The Stackable platform consists of multiple operators that work together. Periodically a platform release is made,
including all components of the platform at a specific version.

////
Here are the headings you can use for the next release. Saves time checking indentation levels.

== Release YY.M

=== New / extended platform features

=== Product versions

==== New versions

==== Deprecated versions

==== Removed versions

=== stackablectl

=== Supported Kubernetes versions

=== Supported OpenShift versions

=== Breaking changes

=== Upgrade from YY.M

==== Using stackablectl

==== Using Helm

==== Known upgrade issues

===== All operators

////

== Release 24.3

=== New / extended platform features

Support for many new product versions::

> Almost all product images have been updated to their latest versions. Some notable examples are Apache Airflow 2.8.1, Trino 422 and Apache Spark 2.5.1. In addition, we started building product binaries from source instead of packaging them from the official releases. This enables greater control over the features and the security aspects of the products. Currently Apache Hadoop and Apache HBase are built from source, other will follow over the course of the next releases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Almost all product images have been updated to their latest versions. Some notable examples are Apache Airflow 2.8.1, Trino 422 and Apache Spark 3.5.1. In addition, we started building product binaries from source instead of packaging them from the official releases. This enables greater control over the features and the security aspects of the products. Currently Apache Hadoop and Apache HBase are built from source and others will follow in coming releases.
```

Security::
We put a special emphasis on security in this release. For this purpose we addressed the following topics:
* Authorization
* Authentication with Kerberos
* OpenID Connect integration
* Vulnerability management

> Starting with this release, user **authorization** is consistent across all products. The Open Policy Agent has been a core component of the platform since the beginning and in this release we enhanced its capability with the inclusion of a new component called `user-info-fetcher`. It allows for authorization policies to be built on many attributes like organizational group membership, resource assignment and much more. The first major identity provider supported by the `user-info-fetcher` is Keycloak but others will follow.

Reviewer: We could also mention here the integration of hadoop with OPA rego rules: https://github.com/stackabletech/hdfs-operator/issues/400
And also rack awareness (maybe under a separate item): https://github.com/stackabletech/hdfs-operator/issues/325

Author: Indeed: https://github.com/stackabletech/documentation/pull/565/commits/fdce274b2ecca35dd655ad6b6ac072e9a597118f

Reviewer: Thank!

> Starting with this release, user **authorization** is consistent across all products. The Open Policy Agent has been at the core of the platform since the beginning and in this release we enhanced it's capability with the inclusion of a new component called `user-info-fetcher`. It allows for authorization policies to be built on many attributes like organizational group membership, resource assignment and much more. The first major identity provider supported by the `user-info-fetcher` is Keycloak but others will follow.

Reviewer: This sounds like every product uses OPA authorization: should we qualify that?
```suggestion
Starting with this release, user **authorization** is consistent across all products. The Open Policy Agent has been a core component of the platform since the beginning and in this release we enhanced its capability with the inclusion of a new component called `user-info-fetcher`. It allows for authorization policies to be built on many attributes like organizational group membership, resource assignment and much more. The first major identity provider supported by the `user-info-fetcher` is Keycloak but others will follow.
```

Kerberos is the most widely used authentication protocol in the enterprise world. We added support for it in Apache Hive and Apache HBase. Also we added examples for running Apache Spark applications in a Kerberos enabled environment.

> OpenID Connect is the de-facto authorization standard on the Web and it's making it's way into enterprise environments. Apache Superset and Trino are the first products to add support for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenID Connect is the de-facto authorization standard on the Web and it's making its way into enterprise environments. Apache Superset and Trino are the first products to add support for it.
```

A core component of SDP is the Secret Operator. In this release, the secret operator will rotate automatically generated certificates. The certificate lifetime is also jittered to avoid downtime upon pod restarts.

TODO: Vulnerability management

[IMPORTANT]  
This is the last release where operators do not enable authentication and encryption by default. To ensure a smooth transition to future releases, we strongly encourage you to enable security features wherever possible in your deployments.

Documentation::

> We are constantly working on improving the platform documentation and custom resource definitions are big part of that. The CRD documentation is now generated automatically and can be found at https://crds.stackable.tech.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are constantly working on improving the platform documentation and custom resource definitions are a significant part of that. The CRD documentation is now generated automatically and can be found at https://crds.stackable.tech.
```

Command line tools::
The `stackablectl` command line tool has been overhauled and can now list endpoints provided by the listener operator. Also operator installation is parallelized which considerably speeds up the process of setting up SDP on fresh Kubernetes clusters.

Custom labels for Helm charts::
In the past, Helm users could not assign custom labels to stacklets. This is now possible and it enables better component management with third party tools.

Bugfixes::
* Apache Airflow Operator: Using git-sync with the KubernetesExecutor is now possible.
* Apache Hadoop Operator: Kerberos principals are now included in the discovery ConfigMap. Also environment variables can now be overridden with the role group's `envOverrides` property. 
* Apache Spark Operator: applications can now be provisioned dynamically without having to fiddle with classpath settings. Also RBAC permissions have been updated to allow the deletion of ConfigMaps when cleaning up applications.
* Trino Operator: Add HDFS configuration files to the `hive.config.resources` property when connecting to a HDFS cluster.

Product features::

> Following are selected product features provided by new versions available in this release:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following are selected product features provided by new versions available in this release:
```

* https://github.com/stackabletech/zookeeper-operator/pull/788[Apache ZooKeeper: 3.9.2]

==== Deprecated versions

The following product versions are deprecated and will be removed in a later release:

* Apache Airflow: 2.7.2, 2.7.3
* Apache Druid: 27.0.0
* Apache Kafka: 3.5.1, 3.5.2
* Apache Nifi: 1.23.2
* Apache Spark: 3.4.1, 3.5.0
* Apache Superset: 2.1.1, 3.0.1. 3.0.3
* Trino: 428
* Apache ZooKeeper: 3.8.3
* Open Policy Agent: 0.57.0

N.B. in some cases a newly supported version is also immediately marked as deprecated. This is done to allow an update path from the latest patch of a minor version (e.g. Kafka 2.8.2 --> 3.4.1).

==== Removed versions

The following product versions are no longer supported (although images for released product versions remain available https://repo.stackable.tech/#browse/browse:docker:v2%2Fstackable[here]):

* Apache Airflow: 2.6.1, 2.6.3
* Apache Druid: 27.0.0
* Apache Hadoop: 3.2.2, 3.2.4
* Apache Hbase: 2.4.12
* Apache Kafka: 2.8.1, 2.8.2, 3.4.1
* Open Policy Agent: 0.51.0
* Apache Spark: 3.4.0
* Apache Superset: 2.1.0
* Apache ZooKeeper: 3.8.1

=== Cockpit and stackablectl

> A new https://github.com/stackabletech/stackable-cockpit[project] called Stackable Cockpit has been started. It is a web-based management tool that allows users to interact with the Stackable data platform. The repository also contains the `stackablectl` command line tool which has been refactored for performance ans stability.

Reviewer: Is cockpit new in 24.3? I thought we mentioned it in 23.11
```suggestion
A new https://github.com/stackabletech/stackable-cockpit[project] called Stackable Cockpit has been started. It is a web-based management tool that allows users to interact with the Stackable data platform. The repository also contains the `stackablectl` command line tool which has been refactored for performance and stability.
```

=== Supported Kubernetes versions

This release supports the following Kubernetes versions:

* `1.29`
* `1.28`
* `1.27`

These Kubernetes versions are no longer supported:

* `1.26`
* `1.25`

=== Supported OpenShift versions

This release supports the following OpenShift versions:

* `4.15`

> * `4.14`

Reviewer: Should we add 4.13 in here as we are probably going to certify against that version as well as 4.14/4.15?

Author: I didn't do it because:
* we never tested anything on it
* 4.13 is _only_ on RedHat "maintenance support" until November.

Reviewer: OK, let's update that once we have certified the operators.

=== Breaking changes

You will need to adapt your existing CRDs due to the following breaking changes detailed below.

==== Stackable Operator for Apache Airflow

* https://github.com/stackabletech/airflow-operator/pull/353[Fixed various issues in the CRD structure. `clusterConfig.credentialsSecret` is now mandatory]

.Breaking changes details
[%collapsible]
====
Apache Airflow requires a database to store metadata. The credentials for this database are configured using the `clusterConfig.credentialsSecret` property. This is `airflow-credentials` in the example below.

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: airflow.stackable.tech/v1alpha1
kind: AirflowCluster
metadata:
  name: airflow
spec:
  image:
    productVersion: "2.8.1"
  clusterConfig:
    credentialsSecret: airflow-credentials
----

> The Secret must contain credentials for Airflow `admin` user as well, connection properties to the database and Redis as shown below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Secret must contain credentials for Airflow `admin` user as well as connection properties to the database and Redis as shown below.
```

The Stackable platform consists of multiple operators that work together. Periodically a platform release is made,
including all components of the platform at a specific version.

////
Here are the headings you can use for the next release. Saves time checking indentation levels.

== Release YY.M

=== New / extended platform features

=== Product versions

==== New versions

==== Deprecated versions

==== Removed versions

=== stackablectl

=== Supported Kubernetes versions

=== Supported OpenShift versions

=== Breaking changes

=== Upgrade from YY.M

==== Using stackablectl

==== Using Helm

==== Known upgrade issues

===== All operators

////

== Release 24.3

=== New / extended platform features

Support for many new product versions::
Almost all product images have been updated to their latest versions.

> Some notable examples are Apache Airflow 2.8.1, Trino 422 and Apache Spark 3.5.1.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some notable examples are Apache Airflow 2.8.1, Trino 442 and Apache Spark 3.5.1.
```

* Apache HBase: 2.4.12
* Apache Kafka: 2.8.1, 2.8.2, 3.4.1
* Open Policy Agent: 0.51.0
* Apache Spark: 3.4.0
* Apache Superset: 2.1.0
* Apache ZooKeeper: 3.8.1

=== Cockpit and stackablectl

A new https://github.com/stackabletech/stackable-cockpit[project] called Stackable Cockpit has been started.
It is a web-based management tool that allows users to interact with the Stackable data platform.
The repository also contains the `stackablectl` command line tool, which has been refactored for performance and stability.

=== Supported Kubernetes versions

This release supports the following Kubernetes versions:

* `1.29`
* `1.28`
* `1.27`

These Kubernetes versions are no longer supported:

* `1.26`
* `1.25`

=== Supported OpenShift versions

This release supports the following OpenShift versions:

* `4.15`
* `4.14`

=== Breaking changes

You will need to adapt your existing CRDs due to the following breaking changes detailed below.

==== Stackable Operator for Apache Airflow

* https://github.com/stackabletech/airflow-operator/pull/353[Fixed various issues in the CRD structure. `clusterConfig.credentialsSecret` is now mandatory]

.Breaking changes details
[%collapsible]
====

> Apache Airflow requires a database to store metadata.

Reviewer 3: I don't really understand what is breaking here, same for Superset.

Author: Yeah, the title of the breaking PR is confusing and doesn't really match the contents. A had a closer look and tried to clarify: https://github.com/stackabletech/documentation/pull/565/commits/9bd8c6e670c2c1f5cfb643507daad1c7fcb3f134

This is another unique feature that brings the SDP platform closer to feature parity with bare metal HDFS deployments.
Of course, the exact meaning of __rack__ is different in Kubernetes environments, but the effect is the same: DataNodes are brought closer to the data they are reading and writing thus improving performance and reliability.
A new https://github.com/stackabletech/hdfs-topology-provider[topology provider] is bundled with the HDFS image that maps Kubernetes labels to a cluster topology.

> // TODO: Link to docs - apparently the README in in the linked repository is all there is.

Reviewer 3: Resolving for now just to get it merged but I'd like to get input on this.
